---layout: posttitle: Is Facial Recognition the Future?category: posts---Facial recognition has long been the subject of many science-fiction stories and future fantasies. The notion of machines being able to recognize human attributes and identify people out of vast data pools has always captured our imagination and led many to ponder about the shape of a future where humans would be "watched over by machines of loving grace" [^1]. With the current state of technology and its phenomenal progress, this concept that seemed alien sixty years ago has now started to offer solutions to a plethora of problems and watching it transition from labs to real-world environments is of great interest from a technical standpoint.With the advances in machine learning and vision as well as neuroscience, various facial recognition systems have been developed to facilitate recognition under numerous external circumstances. The environment in which these systems function can often be characterized in terms of control. A controlled environment is defined as one where profile and frontal pictures are taken, while a uniform background is retained throughout [^2]. On the other hand,  people's attributes in uncontrolled environments are often obscured by elements such as lighting conditions, glasses or facial hair and pose a bigger challenge. For this reason, systems are designed with one or more restrictions in terms of the environment's characteristics in which the process will take place.All the predominant algorithms used in facial recognition systems utilize various distinguishable landmarks that make up facial features. These include the distance between the eyes, the width of the nose, the length of the jaw line and many others. Principal Component Analysis lines up the eyes and mouth of the subject within the images and retains information about the aforementioned elements while compressing all other data. This results in the decomposition of the face structure into orthogonal components known as eigenfaces [^3]. Another process used is Linear Discriminant Analysis [^4], which relies on data collected and sorts it in terms of inter-class variance. Each new dimension created is a linear combination of pixel values which form a template [^5].The advances in face recognition systems have allowed for countless uses in real-world problems. They are widely utilized as security systems, in border controls or for the tracking of potential criminals by real-time search and comparison in databases. In other fields, their use can be complemented by augmented reality technologies to reinforce safety while driving by examining the driver's expressions and motions [^6]. Furthermore, the launch of the Kinect, an enhancement to the Xbox gaming console, has provided plenty of capabilities for researchers to make use of its 3D tracking and face recognition [^7].Despite all the algorithmic and technical advances in such systems, face detection in unconstrained environments still remains a challenging task. According to Ralph Gross, a researcher at the Carnegie Mellon Robotics Institute, "face recognition has been getting pretty good at full frontal faces and 20 degrees off, but as soon as you go towards profile, there have been problems" [^8]. Another basic concern stemming from the rapidly increasing expansion of such systems is related to the fear that personal privacy is being compromised through their use. The prospect of a mass surveillance society similar to that of Big Brother as described in George Orwell's Nineteen-Eighty-Four could be a very plausible one if we do not take care in regulating the laws related to facial recognition systems. The implications of such a scenario would be grave, since these systems are also able to unearth all sorts of personal information that an individual has made public on the web including social media networks, blog posts, etc., which could prove to be a huge invasion in privacy.The creation and rate by which facial recognition systems have evolved over the past years  has been phenomenal. What was once dismissed as merely a product of human imagination and concept with little to no possibilities of ever happening is now used in practical situations, solving real-world problems. Of course, as with many developing technologies, there are some drawbacks that have to be resolved and some optimizations that have to be made in order to fully take advantage of facial recognition's huge potential, but no one can disagree that this technology is going to be in the spotlight in the very near future.[^1]: R. Brautigan. 1967. "All Watched Over By Machines Of Loving Grace"[^2]: D. Swets and J. Weng. 2002. "Face recognition.", Biometrics: Personal Identification in a Networked Society,  pp. 65-86.[^3]: X. Y. N. Tan. 2005. "The Eigenface Approach to Automated Face Recognition.", School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Autralia.[^4]: S. Mika, G. Ratsch, J. Weston, B. Scholkopf, K. R. Mullers. 1999. "Fisher Discriminant Analysis With Kernels.", Neural Networks for Signal Processing IX, Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Signal Processing Society Workshop., pp. 41-48.[^5]: Wikipedia. 2012. "Linear Discriminant Analysis" [Online] Available at: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_discriminant_analysis> [Accessed 1 Dec. 2012].[^6]: V. Vetter, G. J. Giefing, R. Mai, H. Weisser. 1995. "Driver Face Recognition as a Security and Safety Feature", Proceedings-SPIE, The International Society for Optical Engineering., p.182.[^7]: J. Shotton, A. Fitzgibbon, M. Cook, T. Sharp, M. Finocchio, R. Moore, A. Blake. 2011. "Real-Time Human Pose Recognition In Parts From Single Depth Images.", Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1297-1304.[^8]: M. Williams. 2007. "Better face-recognition software" [Online] Available at: <http://www.technologyreview.com/infotech/18796/?a=f> [Accessed 1 Dec. 2012].**BIBLIOGRAPHY*** M. A. Turk and A. P. Pentland. 1991. "Face Recognition Using Eigenfaces.", Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Proceedings CVPR'91., IEEE Computer Society Conference on. IEEE, 1991, pp. 586-591.* G. R. Bradski. 1998. "Computer Vision Face Tracking for Use in a Perceptual User Interface", IEEE Workshop on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 214-219.* C. Zhang and Z. Zhang. 2010. "A Survey of Recent Advances in Face Detection. Technical report", Microsoft Research.N. Degtyarev, and O. Seredin. 2010. "Comparative Testing of Face Detection Algorithms.", Image and Signal Processing, pp. 200-209."Face Recognition" [Online] Available at: <http://www.biometrics.gov/Documents/FaceRec.pdf> [Accessed 1 Dec. 2012].* S. Li and D. Sarno. 2011. "Advertisers Start Using Facial Recognition to Tailor Pitches" [Online]	Available at: <http://articles.latimes.com/2011/aug/21/business/la-fi-facial-	recognition-20110821> [Accessed 1 Dec. 2012].